pystates - A simple and powerful python state machine framework using coroutines

<pre>
  from pystates import StateMachine, State

  class MyMachine(StateMachine):
    class IDLE(State):
      def eval(self):
        while True:
          ev = yield
          if ev.type == pygame.KEYDOWN:
            self.transition("RUNNING", ev.key)

    class RUNNING(State):
      def eval(self, key):
        print "you pressed the %s key" % key
        while True:
          ev = yield
          if self.duration() > 5.0:
            self.transition("COUNTDOWN")

      def leave(self):
        print "timeout!"

    class COUNTDOWN(State):
      def eval(self):
        i = 10
        while True:
          ev = yield
          print "i = %d" % i
          if i == 0:
            self.transition("IDLE")
          i -= 1
</pre>

Sometimes, a state machine is just what you need.  State machines are conceptually simple, but make for ugly code in any language.  Python suffers worse than other languages, as it lacks a select() statement.  The pystates module provides a simple framework that uses coroutines to implement resumable states.  And its easy on the eyes.

To make a state machine, you will subclass the StateMachine class.  You can customize your subclass as needed; minimally you must implement your states as nested State subclasses.  Each State subclass must provide an eval() method (which must follow a particular structure) and optionally a leave() method.

Look in examples/ for a documented example.

A pystates StateMachine does not own a main loop.  You are responsible for your own main loop, and for resuming execution of the StateMachine by calling its handle() method.  This means you can have multiple StateMachines running in parallel, only being resumed when necessary.  When writing network or serial protocol readers for example, I have one StateMachine per file-descriptor, and I resume that machine when select() indicates its file-descriptor is readable.  When writing game code in pygame, I have a StateMachine for every independently intelligent object, and I resume each StateMachine in the course of my pygame event loop.

The eval method must have the same basic structure as the example.  It should perform any setup operations, then enter a while loop.  The first statement in the while loop should read "ev = yield".  This incantataion establishes the method as a "generator."  Whenever any function containing a yield statement is called, the function does not run immediately.  Instead, a generator object is immediately returned to the caller.  This generator object acts as a "coroutine," that is, a method whose execution can be paused and resumed while the rest of the program continues.

What this means for you is that for the period of time during which your state machine is in a given state S, the eval() method of S will never return!  Instead, it will hang out in "while" loop you've written.  Whenever that while loop reaches the "ev = yield" line, control will return to whoever called the machine's handle() method.  When the machines handle() method is next called with an event ev, the current state's eval method will resume, with ev now set equal to handle()'s ev argument.  You are then free to act on the contents of ev however you please, possibly by transition()'ing to a new state.

A single State, therefore, can use only locally scoped variables as "memory."  When your machine transitions to a new state, the machine can EITHER use machine member variables (the machine is always accessible as self.m from inside a state) OR it can pass arguments to the target state in the transition() call.  All args after the state name argument to transition() are passed to the eval() method of the newly transitioned-to state.

Whenever a transition to a new state occurs, the State's leave() method is called (if it exists).  This allows you to include State cleanup code that's always run regardless of which state you're transitioning to.

Sometimes its useful to make a transition when a given state has been running for a certain amount of time (such as in timeout scenarios).  For this reason, any state's eval() method can determine the length of time the state has been active by calling its duration() method.

NIFTY TRICKS
I often write modules to decode network or serial packets whose data payload is sufficiently large that the whole packet cannot be read in a single "read" call (nor would it be desirable to do so).  With pystates, its easy to write protocol decoders that are tolerant of incomplete reads.

<pre>
  class READ_PACKET_HEADER(State):
    def eval(self, fd):
      bytes = ""
      while True:
        ev = yield
        bytes += fd.read(PACKET_HEADER_LEN - len(bytes))
        if len(bytes) < PACKET_HEADER_LEN:
          continue
        else:
          ... decode bytes ...
          self.transition("READ_PACKET_BODY")
</pre>

In essence, if your network link is unable to supply enough bytes to the READ_PACKET_HEADER state, then it simply pauses execution and returns control to the caller.  The caller is presumably in a select() loop.  When the fd is readable again, the main loop can resume the packet.  

[Note that in real life, decoding a packet by successively appending incoming bytes to a new string is a terribly inefficient way to do things.  I tend to use rewritable buffers with ctypes or numpy dtypes.  This is just an illustration.]
